Charles Fairfax Murray (1849-1919) was an artist, art connoisseur, collector and dealer who made important contributions to the South Kensington Museum’s collections: in particular its items of early majolica. He also painted the panels in the Museum’s Green Dining Room, working to Edward Burne-Jones’ designs. Charles Fairfax Murray was born in Bow, East London. He entered Edward Burne-Jones’s studio as an assistant in 1866-7 In 1867 he exhibited at the Royal Academy and soon after began to work for William Morris. Employed as a workshop assistant, Fairfax Murray transferred designs onto stained glass, executed miniature illustrations for Morris’s poems and painted panels onto furniture. In 1869 Murray was involved in the decoration of the Green Dining Room at the South Kensington Museum now known as the Morris Room. This commission was undertaken by William Morris’s firm, Morris, Marshall, Faulkner & Co., and featured designs by Morris, Burne-Jones and Philip Webb. Burne-Jones’s designs for the panels of the dining room were painted by several artists, but Morris was unhappy with the results and asked Murray to repaint each panel. Murray worked as an assistant in Dante Gabriel Rossetti’s workshop (1869-70), and after a trip to Italy in 1871-2 he became a copyist for John Ruskin. In 1869-70 he worked for Dante Gabriel Rossetti, both as a proof-reader and workshop assistant. The next year Fairfax Murray accompanied Morris to Bruges and in 1871-72 he travelled in Italy. His copies of the Camposanto frescos in Pisa impressed both Burne-Jones and Ruskin and the latter subsequently employed Fairfax Murray as a copyist for several years. The assignment took Fairfax Murray back to Italy and in 1875 he married Angelica Albina Collevicchi (d. c. 1927), a seventeen-year-old from Volterra. They settled in Florence in 1878, where Fairfax Murray became increasingly active as a collector and dealer and where they were to have six surviving children.
Following the end of his collaboration with Ruskin in 1883, Fairfax Murray started to periodically return to London. In 1886 he took a studio in Holland Park and started to paint again, mainly copies after Rossetti and works in the late Pre-Raphaelite style. He also resumed contact with Burne-Jones and Morris and associated with such eminent figures as Herbert Horne, Charles Ricketts and Charles Shannon. Further Fairfax Murray started to act as adviser and agent for the art dealers Agnew’s and Colnaghi and for the Fitzwilliam Museum, the National Gallery and the South Kensington Museum (now the Victoria & Albert Museum). He was also instrumental in helping establish a number of important American collections, including the Boston Museum of Fine Arts and the Fog Art Museum at Harvard University. He remained in Italy until 1884-5, after which he returned periodically to London. During this time he became an important collector, dealer and connoisseur of art and books. In the late 1880s and early 1890s he was a consultant to the South Kensington Museum, selling items from his own collection to the Museum, and advising Museum staff on purchases such as Italian terracotta reliefs and sculptures, ecclesiastical metalwork, bronze mortars and early majolica. In 1888, Fairfax Murray met Blanche Richmond (d. 1952), the mother of his six later children.
Divided between Florence and London, Fairfax Murray sold most of his personal collection during his lifetime: his Pre-Raphaelite paintings to the Birmingham City Museum in 1903-06 and his Italian Renaissance drawings to John Pierpont Morgan in 1907-11. But he was also a most generous donor: amongst other items, he gave Titian’s Tarquin and Lucretia and a rare aquamanile to the Fitzwilliam Museum. In 1895 he donated Burne-Jones’s model for the mosaic decoration of the American church in Rome to the Museum. Murray died at his home in Middlesex.
