Frances Jane Horner (née Graham; 1854/55-1940) was a collector, member of the Souls social group, and a patron of the arts. She was depicted several times by Edward Burne-Jones, and commissioned works by Edwin Lutyens, Eric Gill, and William Nicholson. She was the sixth child and fourth daughter of William Graham (1817–1885) and Jane Catherine (née Loundes; 1819/20–1899). Her father became the head of the family business that imported dry goods from India and Graham's port from Portugal. He served as the Liberal MP for Glasgow from 1865 to 1874. She was educated at home by governesses, at Langley Hall near Manchester and later at 54 Lowndes Square in London. Her father's background in "trade" limited her opportunities in London society, but according to the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, she was one of the first young unmarried women in London to entertain her own guests. Through her father's patronage of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, she became known to the artists Dante Gabriel Rossetti and Edward Burne-Jones. Although married, Burne-Jones became besotted with Frances, and painted her likeness in several works. In 1869, when Frances was 15, he drew her as "The Lady of the Window" in the Vita Nuova. She was included in The Golden Stairs in 1880, carrying cymbals at the bottom of the stairs. She has been described as the one of the most important women his life, after his wife, his daughter and his mistress Maria Zambaco. In 1883, she married the barrister John Francis Fortescue Horner (1842–1927). His family owned Mells Manor and Mells Park near Frome in Somerset. Her husband served as a Justice of the Peace, a Deputy Lieutenant, and became the latest in a long line of Horners to serve as High Sheriff of Somerset in 1885. With Stafford Howard, he was a Commissioners of Woods, Forests and Land Revenues from 1895 to 1907, charged with the management of Crown lands. She became Lady Horner when her husband became a Knight Commander of the Royal Victorian Order (KCVO) in 1907. Horner became a hostess at Mells, entertaining their circle of artists and intellectuals, the Souls, which included Edwin Lutyens, H. H. Asquith and R. B. Haldane. Lady Paget called her the "High Priestess" of the Souls.
She continued her father's role as friend and patron of Burne-Jones. She undertook elaborate embroidery work: an example designed by Burne-Jones, L'Amor che mouve il Sole e Faltre Stelle ("The love that moves the sun and other stars", a quotation from Dante's Divine Comedy, Paradiso, Canto XXXIII, line 145) hangs in St Andrew's Church, Mells. The church also houses a stained glass window by William Nicholson, commissioned as a memorial to her husband Sir John Horner, and the large equestrian statue that she commissioned as a memorial to her elder son, Edward Horner, which includes a bronze statue by Alfred Munnings installed in 1923 on a plinth by Lutyens, with lettering by Eric Gill. The village of Mells contains other works commissioned by Horner from leading artists, two shelters designed by Lutyens with lettering by Gill. She served as a Justice of the Peace and was appointed as an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in 1919. She continued to live in Mells after her husband's death in 1927, living with her widowed daughter Katharine Asquith. She published memoirs, Time Remembered, in 1933. The house was inherited by the family of her daughter Katherine and is now the home of Raymond Asquith, 3rd Earl of Oxford and Asquith.
