Ellen Heaton (1816–1894) was a philanthropist and a wealthy art collector in Leeds, best known for her patronage of and friendships with members and associates of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood and the influential art critic John Ruskin. Heaton was the daughter of bookseller John Heaton and sister of physician John Deakin Heaton. Discouraged from continuing her studies by the prevailing antipathy towards female education, she joined Leeds Literary and Philosophical Society (of which her brother was, at one time, President). She was less keen on the more sensual and erotic Pre-Raphaelite paintings, and left Ruskin embarrassed when she refused a Burne-Jones painting he had brought to her attention.  Her house is now the campus of the Swarthmore Education Centre, which holds an annual lecture in her memory.

John Aldam Heaton (1830-1897) worked in his early adult life as a wool and textile manufacturer at Beehive Mill in Bradford, moving in 1860 to Woodbank, an ancient farm near Harden, Bingley, in Yorkshire. Influenced by the Pre-Raphaelite movement and counting Dante Gabriel Rossetti, Burne-Jones, William Morris, and Norman Shaw among his friends, Heaton became fascinated by all areas of art and interior design, in particular furniture, stained glass and wallpaper design. Several of his wallpaper designs are kept at the Victoria and Albert Museum.  He was married to Ellen Heaton, a collector and patron of the Pre-Raphaelites also. A member of the Neo-Classical Arts and Crafts movement, Heaton was forthright in his views and published several books about art and design. These included Beauty and Art in 1889, a critique of taste, and Furniture and Decoration in England during the Eighteenth Century in 1890, a work that acclaimed the work of Chippendale, Sheraton and Heppelwhite among others. In 1895 he designed and published the lengthily titled Chimney-pieces, Ornamental Lattice, Wall-papers, Frieze Painting, Blinds, Carpets, Furniture, Designs for Needlework, Embroidery, Curtains, Church Work, Stained Glass, Painting, that undoubtedly indicated the breadth of his interests.

