Memorial Art Gallery, University of Rochester. Founded in 1913 by Emily Sibley Watson, the Memorial Art Gallery has played a central role in Rochester’s cultural life for more than 100 years. Since its founding, the Memorial Art Gallery’s collection has grown to more than 12,000 works of art. Representing cultures from around the world and across millennia, the permanent collection is renowned for its breadth and its quality. In April 1915, the Gallery held an important exhibition of Whistler portraiture organized by Gallery supporter Elmer Adler. The Gallery is a memorial to James George Averell, a grandson of Hiram Sibley. After Averell died at age 26, his mother, Emily S. Watson (by then wife of James Sibley Watson), spent years seeking a way to publicly commemorate him. Meanwhile, Rush Rhees, president of the University of Rochester, had been looking for benefactors to help him add to the University's campus, then located on Prince Street in the City of Rochester. Hiram Sibley had some 30 years previous funded the construction of the University's library that displayed part of Sibley's art collection on its upper floor for a time, but Rhees wanted to construct a dedicated art gallery. The Rochester Art Club, which was the focal point for art enthusiasts of the area supported the creation of the gallery. Rhees assembled a board of managers, including the Art Club's president, George L. Herdle, in November 1912 and by the eighth of the following October, presided over the Gallery's opening. The inaugural exhibition consisted of paintings from dealers for sale, with the Gallery taking a 10% commission. The wealthiest families immediately gifted their purchases to the gallery to start its permanent collection.
Exhibits in the early years of the Gallery consisted of loans from the private collections of George Eastman, the Sibleys, the Watsons, and other prominent Rochester families. Herdle kept the Gallery's walls filled with new works; after his death in 1922 his daughter and University of Rochester graduate, Gertrude L. Herdle began a 40-year career as the museum's director. Another daughter, Isabel C. Herdle, served in various curatorial roles beginning in 1932 after schooling at Radcliffe College, the Courtauld Institute of Art, the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm and stints at the Fogg and the de Young museums.

.
