Rossetti Beata Beatrix 101_01. Rossetti draws a parallel in this picture between the Italian poet Dante's despair at the death of his beloved Beatrice and his own grief at the death of his wife Elizabeth Siddal, who died on 11 February 1862. Dante Alighieri (1265-1321) recounted the story of his unrequited love and subsequent mourning for Beatrice Portinari in the Vita Nuova. This was Rossetti's first English translation and appeared in 1864 as part of his own publication, The Early Italian Poets. The picture is a portrait of Elizabeth Siddall as Beatrice. It represents a dream or vision, filled with symbolic references, not at the moment of death, but transformed by a 'sudden spiritual transfiguration' (Rossetti letter of 1873, quoted in Wilson, p. 86). She is posed in an attitude of ecstasy, with her hands before her and her lips parted, as if she is about to receive Communion. According to F. G. Stephens, the grey and green of her dress signify 'the colours of hope and sorrow as well as of love and life' ('Beata Beatrix by Dante Gabriel Rossetti', Portfolio, vol.22, 1891, p.46). In the background Dante looks across at Love, portrayed as an angel and holding in her palm the flickering flame of Beatrice's life. In the distance is Florence’s Ponte Vecchio, the setting for Dante's story. Beatrice's impending death is evoked by the dove - symbol of the holy spirit - which descends, an opium poppy in its beak. This is also a reference to the death of Siddall, called by Rossetti 'The Dove', and who died of an overdose of laudanum. Both dove and Love are red, the colour of passion, yet the bird is a messenger of death. Beatrice's death at nine o'clock on 9th June 1290 is foreseen in the sundial which casts its shadow over number nine. The picture frame, designed by Rossetti, has references to death and mourning, including the date of Beatrice's death and a phrase from Lamentations 1:1, quoted by Dante in the Vita Nuova: 'Quomodo sedet sola civitas' ('how doth the city sit solitary'), referring to the mourning of Beatrice's death throughout the city of Florence.

